Start Markdown documentation of the maps system (#434)
pret/pokeplatinum: docs/maps/bdhc.md

# BDHC

> This document aims to provide an overview of the BDHC subsystem, which is used to provide height information on maps.

Reviewer: **suggestion**: I feel that the `Introduction` section below serves a better overview of the contents of this document, and that this line is superfluous. What do you think?

Author: It was there mostly to be consistent with the other files. I don't mind removing it.

## Introduction

> The BDHC subsystem is used to calculate the height of the terrain. It is used for
> collision detection and the map objects height, for example.
> 
> It is basically Pokémon's way of adding height to an otherwise 2D engine (at
> least, from the perspective of the map).
> 
> BDHC data is stored alongside each map data.

Reviewer: **suggestion**:

```suggestion
The BDHC subsystem is used to calculate the height of the terrain. It is used for
collision detection and enabling height in an otherwise 2D movement system. This
data is stored alongside individual maps.
```

> [!NOTE]
> Throughout this document, we consider that a 2D point is represented by a

> > pair of coordinates $(x, z)$. This allows more understandable conversions

Reviewer: **thought**: It may be worthwhile for us to explain the sourcing of the `X, Z, Y` coordinate system (being that it is right-handed and Y-up).

Author: Could you expand on that?

Reviewer: The coordinate system used by the game, as far as I'm aware, is right-handed and defines Y+ as "up". This is aligned with the models being built in Maya, which I believe we know for certain that they were. It's convenient that it uses the same system as Godot.

Here are some comparisons that I found, for reference:

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/af56e1de-45e8-490e-806f-6cd0b528396c)

Author: Thanks for the reference!

Added this bit at the end of the note:
```
The game's coordinate system follows the right-hand rule, with the Y axis pointing upwards.
```

of any plate, collision detection and height calculation will behave erratically.

It is possible to have multiple plates covering the same area, but at different
heights. For instance, this can be done to create bridges that can also be walked
underneath (such as the ones found on Route 216). When a map object is within the
bounds of multiple plates, all possible heights are calculated and the one closest
to the current height of the object is chosen.

The animation below represents a plate, in blue, and its normal vector, in red, going
from a flat position to a tilted one, like those used to make stairs. The black
outline is the original position of the plate.

https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/39736bea-c0c9-4016-9d15-b8302f3263d0

The animation below represents a plate, in blue, and Dawn moving on it. The height
of Dawn is calculated as she is moving on the plate.

https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/10251494-9bd6-41d4-b2b7-866d5b784109

### How to calculate the height of a point?

This section is targeted at people who are interested in the math necessary to
calculate the height of a point on a plate. For instance, this can be useful for

> implementing a game engine.

Reviewer: **suggestion**: Rather than repeat this information for each of the following subsections, I would group them beneath a parent section that contains this disclaimer, so that users know that they can skip the entire section if they are not interested.

Author: Done that, and moved everything to the end of the doc.

AC_x\\
AC_y\\
AC_z
\end{pmatrix} \\
\end{align*}
$$

Then, we calculate the normal vector of the plane, which is the cross product of
$\overrightarrow{AB}$ and $\overrightarrow{AC}$:

$$
\begin{align*}
n &= \overrightarrow{AB} \times \overrightarrow{AC} \\
\Leftrightarrow \quad n &= \begin{pmatrix}
AB_y * AC_z - AB_z * AC_y\\
AB_z * AC_x - AB_x * AC_z\\
AB_x * AC_y - AB_y * AC_x
\end{pmatrix} \\
\Leftrightarrow \quad n &= \begin{pmatrix}
n_x\\
n_y\\
n_z
\end{pmatrix}
\end{align*}
$$

Now, we can normalize the normal vector $n$ to get the unit normal
vector $\hat{n}$ of the plate:

$$
\begin{align*}
\hat{n} &= \frac{1}{\|n\|} * n \\
\Leftrightarrow \quad \hat{n} &= \frac{1}{\sqrt{n_x^2 + n_y^2 + n_z^2}} * n \\
\Leftrightarrow \quad \hat{n} &= \begin{pmatrix}
\hat{n}_x\\
\hat{n}_y\\
\hat{n}_z
\end{pmatrix}
\end{align*}
$$

Finally, we can calculate the constant $d$ of the plate by using the top-left
point $A$ and the unit normal vector $\hat{n}$ (this is a transformed
equation of the plane):

$$
\begin{align*}
d &= -\hat{n} \cdot A \\
\Leftrightarrow \quad d &= -\hat{n}_x * A_x - \hat{n}_y * A_y - \hat{n}_z * A_z
\end{align*}
$$

## Strips

> Instead of having to check every plate in the map to find the ones that contains

Reviewer: **typo**:

```suggestion
Instead of having to check every plate in the map to find the ones that contain
```

a map object (some complex map can reach over 100 plates!), the game engine uses
strips to speed up the process.

Strips are basically a list of plates that are all intersecting a given Z coordinate.
This Z coordinate is stored in the strip, alongside its plates, and is called the

> "scanline".

Reviewer: **suggestion**: I would be careful with this terminology, as it can mean something *very* different in computer graphics: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scan_line

Author: This is basically what I had mind when seeing how the strips were generated, basically "scanning" from top to bottom for all Z coordinate that start/end a plate.

Do we have a better name for this? We could simply call this something along the lines of "the strip's `z`", but I'm worried it could be mixed up with the `z` coordinate of BDHC points.

From [Mikelan's original post](https://projectpokemon.org/home/forums/topic/37816-gen-iv-bdhc-files-terrain-settings), here's the description of that field:

> The structure of each element of Part T is:
>
> 00 00 YY YY NN NN UU UU
>
> Where YY YY is the Y-axis line where the lower limit of the strip is.

My original interpretation of this description was that this field contained the "bottom-most" Z coordinate of all plates in the strip (in other words, the max value of the Z coord of all bottom-right points), which is definitely not the case. Although it could have been just me misunderstanding this description.

(in the code, we currently documented this field as [`lowerBound`](https://github.com/pret/pokeplatinum/blob/5c4943582b158c01cc2cb538a1acb09f00adf492/include/overlay005/bdhc.h#L23))
